<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
					<p epub:type="subtitle">The Subject of This Book</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">It is written to maintain the thesis that industrial society as we know it will tend towards the reestablishment of slavery.</p>
			</header>
			<p>This book is written to maintain and prove the following truth:⁠—</p>
			<p>That our free modern society in which the means of production are owned by a few being necessarily in unstable equilibrium, it is tending to reach a condition of stable equilibrium <strong>by the establishment of compulsory labour legally enforcible upon those who do not own the means of production for the advantage of those who do</strong>. With this principle of compulsion applied against the non-owners there must also come a difference in their status; and in the eyes of society and of its positive law men will be divided into two sets: the first economically free and politically free, possessed of the means of production, and securely confirmed in that possession; the second economically unfree and politically unfree, but at first secured by their very lack of freedom in certain necessaries of life and in a minimum of well-being beneath which they shall not fall.</p>
			<p>Society having reached such a condition would be released from its present internal strains and would have taken on a form which would be stable: that is, capable of being indefinitely prolonged without change. In it would be resolved the various factors of instability which increasingly disturb that form of society called “capitalist,” and men would be satisfied to accept, and to continue in, such a settlement.</p>
			<p>To such a stable society I shall give, for reasons which will be described in the next section, the title of <b>The Servile State</b>.</p>
			<p>I shall not undertake to judge whether this approaching organisation of our modern society be good or evil. I shall concern myself only with showing the necessary tendency towards it which has long existed and the recent social provisions which show that it has actually begun.</p>
			<p>This new state will be acceptable to those who desire consciously or by implication the reestablishment among us of a difference of status between possessor and non-possessor: it will be distasteful to those who regard such a distinction with ill favour or with dread.</p>
			<p>My business will not be to enter into the discussion between these two types of modern thinkers, but to point out to each and to both that that which the one favours and the other would fly is upon them.</p>
			<p>I shall prove my thesis in particular from the case of the industrial society of Great Britain, including that small, alien, and exceptional corner of Ireland, which suffers or enjoys industrial conditions today.</p>
			<p>I shall divide the matter thus:⁠—</p>
			<ol>
				<li>
					<p>I shall lay down certain definitions.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Next, I shall describe the institution of slavery and <b>The Servile State</b> of which it is the basis, as these were in the ancient world.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>I shall then:</p>
			<ol start="3">
				<li>
					<p>Sketch very briefly the process whereby that age-long institution of slavery was slowly dissolved during the Christian centuries, and whereby the resulting medieval system, based upon highly divided property in the means of production, was</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>wrecked in certain areas of Europe as it approached completion, and had substituted for it, in practice though not in legal theory, a society based upon <strong>capitalism</strong>.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Next, I shall show how capitalism was of its nature unstable, because its social realities were in conflict with all existing or possible systems of law, and because its effects in denying <em>sufficiency</em> and <em>security</em> were intolerable to men; how being thus <em>unstable</em>, it consequently presented a <em>problem</em> which demanded a solution: to wit, the establishment of some stable form of society whose law and social practice should correspond, and whose economic results, by providing <em>sufficiency</em> and <em>security</em>, should be tolerable to human nature.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>I shall next present the only three possible solutions:⁠—</p>
					<ol>
						<li>
							<p>Collectivism, or the placing of the means of production in the hands of the political officers of the community.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Property, or the reestablishment of a distributive state in which the mass of citizens should severally own the means of production.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Slavery, or a servile state in which those who do not own the means of production shall be legally compelled to work for those who do, and shall receive in exchange a security of livelihood.</p>
						</li>
					</ol>
					<p>Now, seeing the distaste which the remains of our long Christian tradition has bred in us for directly advocating the third solution and boldly supporting the reestablishment of slavery, the first two alone are open to reformers: (1) a reaction towards a condition of well-divided property or the “distributive state”; (2) an attempt to achieve the ideal “collectivist state.”</p>
					<p>It can easily be shown that this second solution appeals most naturally and easily to a society already capitalist on account of the difficulty which such a society has to discover the energy, the will, and the vision requisite for the first solution.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>I shall next proceed to show how the pursuit of this ideal collectivist state which is bred of capitalism leads men acting upon a capitalist society <em>not</em> towards the collectivist state nor anything like it, but to that third utterly different thing⁠—the “servile state.”</p>
					<p>To this eighth section I shall add an appendix showing how the attempt to achieve collectivism gradually by public purchase is based upon an illusion.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Recognising that theoretical argument of this kind, though intellectually convincing, is not sufficient to the establishment of my thesis, I shall conclude by giving examples from modern English legislation, which examples prove that the servile state is actually upon us.</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
			<p>Such is the scheme I design for this book.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
